# Tidy Data Project
### Coursera.org - GetData Course 
### Author: Wesley Small

The purpose of this project is demonstrate the ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. 

This READ-ME file has the following sections below:

1. [Overview](README.md#overview)
2. [Background and Synopsis](README.md#background-and-synopsis)
3. [What makes this Tidy](README.md#what-makes-this-tidy)
4. [About the R Code -> run_anaylsis.R](README.md#about-the-r-code---run_anaylsisr)
5. [Set up & Execution of R Code](README.md#set-up--execution-of-r-code)
6. [Load Tidy Dataset](README.md#load-tidy-dataset)


## Overview

This respository has the following artifacts listed for review:

* [README.md](README.md) - This document being currently read,
* [getdata_project_tidy_dataset.txt](getdata_project_tidy_dataset.txt) - The tidy reshaped dataset required for this project assignment
* [CodeBook.md](CodeBook.md) -  A document that describes the variables, the data, and any transformations or work, performed to clean up the data,
* [run_analysis.R](run_analysis.R) - The R code that creates the tidy dataset.  See section below named R Code for more an overview about the code.  Within the codebase are inline documents for detailed steps to load and reshape the tidy dataset.


## Background and Synopsis

One of the most exciting areas in all of data science right now is wearable computing - see for example this article . Companies like Fitbit, Nike, and Jawbone Up are racing to develop the most advanced algorithms to attract new users. The data linked to from the course website represent data collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available at the site where the data was obtained: 

<http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones>

The raw dataset is obtained from:

<https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>

*** The above section was cited: From the getdata course project instructions***

In addition, a thorough dissertation about Tidy Data is provided by Hadley Wickham in his paper called [Tidy data](http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf) 2014.  

There are additonal references made to the summarized lectures notes provided Professor Jeff Leek at
<https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata/lecture_slides/01_03_componentsOfTidyData.pdf>.

Another reference of summarized notes about Tidy Data are found here: [Keep Your Data Tidy](http://serialmentor.com/blog/2014/7/20/keep-your-data-tidy)
<http://serialmentor.com/blog/2014/7/20/keep-your-data-tidy>

## What makes this Tidy?

The original raw Samsung Wearables dataset is spread out over multiple files. The notes about the format of the original dataset is not combine in the raw data making it difficult to read. These findings are consistent with the information discussed our instructor. Professor Jeff Leak, in his lecture about Tidy Data.  Please see [Tidy Data Slide #3](http://jtleek.com/modules/03_GettingData/01_03_componentsOfTidyData/#3).
 
The Samsung Wearables dataset is transformed from it's raw form to the requested tidy data format outlined for this assignement using the following methods:

1. Merged together the required data artifacts within the Samumg UCI HAR Dataset to a single data construct.
2. Combined in the human readable labels into this new dataset
3. Reduced and reshaped the dataset in order to perform specific grouped based calculations of the measurements related to combinations subject, activity type and meansurement type.
4. Prepared the final data for output (and subsequent review) with additional cleansing of the final data model. In this case, The column names were altered to be meaningful related to a narrow long tidy dataset.

The final tidy dataset generated by the [run_analysis.R](run_analysis.R) script satisfies both:

    A. Course Project Instruction, "...data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject."

    B. The rules Tidy Data which Professor Jeff Leek summarrized in his lectures on Tiy Data. Please see [Tidy Data Slide #4](http://jtleek.com/modules/03_GettingData/01_03_componentsOfTidyData/#4). 
        * Each variable you measure should be in one column.  
        * Each Observation should be in one Row.  
        * The header should be included with the variable names.
        * Make the variable names more human readable.


## About the R Code -> run_anaylsis.R

The run_analysis.R that does the following step requested in the project assignment:
 
1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names. 
5. From the data set in step 4, creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject.


## Set up & Execution of R Code

To execute the R code **run_analysis.R**

1. Place run_analysis.R script in a working directory
2. Extract the contents of the Samsung UCI HAR Dataset zipped achive in to the working directory.  There should be an **UCI HAR Dataset** subfolder. Under the subfolder should be the training and test folders.
3. Execute from the working directory 
    source("./run_analysis.R") 

## Load Tidy Dataset

***The following code has been provided to load the dataset in R.***

    filepathTidyDataset <- "./getdata_project_tidy_dataset.txt"
    dfTidyDataset <- read.table(filepathTidyDataset, header = TRUE)
    
    dim(dfTidyDataset)  # VIEW DIMENSIONS
    str(dfTidyDataset)  # VIEW STRUCTURE (SCHEMA)
    head(dfTidyDataset) # VIEW TOP FEW LINES
    tail(dfTidyDataset) # VIEW LAST FEW LINES
    
    View(dfTidyDataset) # INVOKE DATA VIEWER
    